Adding a first draft of team building (#86)
adoptingerlang/adoptingerlang: adoptingerlang.org

:EXPORT_HUGO_MENU: :menu main :parent team-building
:END:

> In this chapter, we'll look into the best ways to set up your team for success when getting started. Not just in terms of tools, but actually in who is going to be on that team. Don't worry, you shouldn't need to fire or replace anyone; however, you'll have to create expertise in a new area where you currently have little.

Author: You're right, it doesn't. Might be worth a bit of a rework.

As this prototyping work is being done, your expert should start guiding your team towards broader and more complex concepts: developing for fault tolerance (how do you structure supervision trees properly?), eventually going for releases, and finally performance-related and production debugging concerns.

One of our favorite experiment to run is to have the expert guide the team into building their own supervision structure, ideally with the prototype the team has been working on:

1. Start with the various components the team has identified (web servers, connection handlers, encoders/decoders, configuration managers, and so on), and draw them on a whiteboard

> 2. Draw communication channels between the components. Highlight the places where messages are being passed, where network communication takes place.

Author: I'll probably go just for 'or' there. and/or usually is something editors frown upon.

Doing the full learning experiment may take a few months, but even after a few weeks you'll likely see some of your non-expert employees slowly gain confidence and start helping others. Your expert, knowing you want his expertise to spread, should actually encourage that behaviour, and start delegating on the more basic questions. The transition to a more mature and functional team will be taking place then: people will be teaching each other about various topics; your expert's expertise will be less and less necessary—likely only for tricky issues that are more and more rare—and they'll then be free to either participate to the projects on more equal footing, or start moving to other teams you have that also want to adopt the technology.

> Regardless of how you run things at that point, make sure that from time to time your expert sits down with the rest of the team, and asks them about the various points of friction they have. Figure out what annoys them about the toolings, the language, and so on. This will help everyone re-calibrate and improve things. It's otherwise frequent for newcomers to just assume "this is how it is" and they may end up living with far more annoyances than they otherwise would.

Author: I'll revisit and maybe make an actual notice/call-out out of it.

*** Building Without an Expert

Building without an expert is definitely a bit trickier. It's not impossible (some people had to become experts on their own to get going) and there are a lot of resources out there—books, talks, forums and chat rooms, and so on—but it's definitely more of a challenge and it can be costlier. The biggest risk in building without an expert is that you may not know how long you're going to spend in wrong paths and bad avenues, and the bad learning you do early can stick for a longer time.

This is, ultimately, not too different from regular development, but you'll be headed that way willingly. As such, you may want to structure things a bit differently. Rather than picking one expert and your enthusiastic folks, you will want to explode the requirements and roles across everyone, to try and get the dynamics than an expert would have facilitated.

> Identify people who have prior knowledge of functional languages; they won't know everything, but they already have a head start. Also identify some self-directed learners, those who enjoy sitting down and digging into something. Their job will be to read books and figure things out a few weeks ahead of everyone else; they're quire literally the piano teacher only ahead of you by a couple of weeks. You'll want to find someone who enjoys teaching, writing documentation, or preparing demos. That's often pretty hard, so if you can't find anyone, assign a rotating schedule to that responsibility. Put them in charge of doing broader information dissemination, maintaining docs, and a quick "getting started" track to what you do in your organisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Identify people who have prior knowledge of functional languages; they won't know everything, but they already have a head start. Also identify some self-directed learners, those who enjoy sitting down and digging into something. Their job will be to read books and figure things out a few weeks ahead of everyone else; they're quite literally the piano teacher only ahead of you by a couple of weeks. You'll want to find someone who enjoys teaching, writing documentation, or preparing demos. That's often pretty hard, so if you can't find anyone, assign a rotating schedule to that responsibility. Put them in charge of doing broader information dissemination, maintaining docs, and a quick "getting started" track to what you do in your organization.
```

Have everyone do bits of development and getting used to the feel of the language, getting involved with things in the community, and leverage the code already existing out there. Here are a few ideas:

> - look into existing code out there, and do a show-and-tell of various libraries and their approaches; dig to figure out how they are structured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- look into existing code, and do a show-and-tell of various libraries and their approaches; dig to figure out how they are structured.
```

Dropping the "out there" just because it was in the last sentence as well.

> - look into existing code out there, and do a show-and-tell of various libraries and their approaches; dig to figure out how they are structured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- look into existing code out there, and do a show-and-tell of various libraries and their approaches; dig in to figure out how they are structured.
```

- if you can't figure out why an open-source library does what it does, feel free to ask their authors in an issue, or people on slack, mailing lists, or a forum. Get the real answer, and show it out there
- do code reviews on the code you have written, where the main objective is everyone discussing some things where you (so far) had not had agreements. This may include syntax and alignment, but will more likely include things like just how much do you document, the better testing approaches you'd prefer to normalize on, and so on.

> - when you get stumped, have a quick chat to figure out what approaches are possible, what you will do to experiment and find out, and then figure out how to make a decision

Reviewer: "what you will do to experiment and find out" -- find out what?

> - do experiment reports where if a few people on your team worked on a thing, they report back on their experience to other people.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- do experiment reports, this is where a few people on your team worked on a thing and they then report back on their experience to other people
```

> You'll also want to ask people for help online. Answers might be slow, but they can eventually come. StackOverflow is alright, but has never really managed to foster a community for Erlang. More interactive areas (slack, IRC, mailing lists, forums) tend to have longer-lasting memberships with a better way to figure out what you actually need. Remember that newcomers to a technology are always at risk of suffering from the [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XY_problem][XY problem]], and so will your team.

Reviewer: Should be linking to the chats, lists, forums, etc. Likely link to a separate section that includes this instead of putting them all here because we'll want to reference it in multiple places.
